[Music]
you can't really think about the brain
as hardware and you can't think about it
as software it's this weird other thing
that i call livewear which is that it's
constantly reconfiguring its own
circuitry so everything that you
learn every little thing changes the the
pattern of circuitry in your brain
if you ask usain bolt how do i get
stronger legs to run it's
intuitive but the flesh in our skulls
it's meant to think and feel
that is the most important thing for
people as they get older is to seek
new experiences and that's the thing
that often doesn't happen especially
when somebody has retired
so the conclusion is
anything difficult where you have to
think
is good for your brain
you can actually boost visual processing
speed by 20 even if you're young and
healthy so i mean these are young and
healthy people that are already
considered to be at the peak of their
cognitive prowess
so that's proof
that food
changes minds
lessons about dieting learn through
controlling
epilepsy and seizures in kids in areas
where there's no medicine
we put a lecture in people's brains and
we look at their brains while things
happen to them and we actually see it in
action we see how the brain changes when
people communicate
the excess connections across the brain
creates a greater propensity to link
seemingly unrelated ideas and concepts
and that's the basis of metaphor and
creativity
[Music]
my whole belief about the meaning of
life it's not the exact right word but
um is to
find out how many skills i can acquire
that have utility then put that utility
to the test and service of something
bigger than myself so that's like my
mission in life right so what are things
that i should understand about the brain
that would allow me to acquire more
skills acquire them faster put them to
use more effectively like what are
either realizations about the brain or
training techniques that i should know
about
um yeah i mean a big part of this has to
do with the the fact that we live our
lives mostly on autopilot unless we put
a lot of effort into not doing that and
so
um so just by getting off autopilot i'm
but wouldn't that so that's ultimately
just sort of making new connections so
examples that you give oftentimes drive
home a new way brush your teeth with
your left hand
um and i certainly do feel the impact of
that like from a
stave off neurogenerative decline that
seems to make a lot of sense and you've
talked about the nuns who
donated their brains to science why i
don't know but that's incredible and all
of them right had like early stage
dementia but they showed no signs not
all of them but a much bigger percentage
than anyone thought about a third of
them wow had had alzheimer's but it
wasn't clear when they were alive
because they were so cognitively active
because they were doing stuff they were
first of all they were embedded in the
social network because they were living
in the convents and so they had
responsibilities and conversations and
so on and that made it so that even
though their brain was falling apart
with alzheimer's
nobody knew it they didn't have the
cognitive effects there and is this at
the center of your upcoming book
livewire yeah it's you know the theme of
that book is that you can't really think
about the brain as hardware and you
can't think about it as software it's
this weird other thing that i call
livewear which is that it's constantly
reconfiguring its own circuitry so
everything that you
learn every little thing changes
the the pattern of circuitry in your
brain so when you first learn that my
name was david
you know that that's underpinned by a
physical change in the structure of your
brain which is wild i mean every single
thing that you learn watching this right
now and they're thinking okay wait do i
make better decisions when i'm hungry or
full night day
what what are you looking for and what
can they look for at home so i would say
what we do with a lot of people who are
kind of in senior positions in companies
that want to actually make decisions
better we have a protocol that's a
little bit tedious so it's not easy to
do it but i'll tell you what it is and
then you can think of ways to maybe
fight yourself so we have them basically
walk
for a week with a diary and make choices
and just write them down so tell us okay
you know i had this fish of the steak
for lunch and i chose this and this is
how i chosen and they also write whether
they were happy or not with the choice
now this is done
the way they would it normally but we
also add one more thing
we put the eeg cap on their head all day
for more than 24 hours so they work with
something that measures their brain
activity and there's moments where we
have to replace the batteries there's a
lot of like gaps there but all together
we have them walk through life with
both living life the way they do and
reflect on the
choices but also have us look at their
brain and what we do at the end of the
three days one week as long as they
would do that it's kind of uncomfortable
and embarrassing sometimes
we ask them to kind of look at all the
choices and tell us which ones were good
which ones were bad and then we look at
their brains and we see what was their
brain looking like what did it look like
when they made choices that they were
happy with
and we sometimes see that there are
things in their brain that are kind of
repeated so maybe they make choices more
using this part of the brain that i'm
trying to simplify but looking at part
of the brain that are more emotional
rather than a
like rational we see that they activate
small parts of the brain that are buried
deep inside it has to do with reflection
rather than like thinking so we kind of
and we tell them you know here's what we
learned about you you are better in this
and that state so that's one thing so
it's kind of not easy to apply because
you still have to have this thing on
your head right so not everyone can do
that but at least people in senior
positions who feel that you know their
choices are critical come to us and they
say okay help me i want to know who i am
better and are there any things that
somebody with normal cognitive function
can do to elevate like how do we
start pushing the mind a bit yeah i want
to do some cool yeah the general story
yeah the general story about that is
that
um
it's about seeking novelty because
with the brain uh
it very quickly gets into uh when you're
repeating something the brain puts less
and less effort into it and you're not
forming new connections and so on but
when people push themselves to do novel
things all the time that forces new
connectivity and so um
the best thing that people can do i mean
we don't really have to worry about it
at our age but you know once we get to a
certain point and when you you when you
get to 200
the thing you have to worry about at
some point is the issue of
um
your world shrinking and doing the same
little things and not sort of expanding
and seeking new things so
um isn't there a name for this like the
default
when you go into autopilot oh
i mean i i talk about this is the
unconscious brain which is um
you know which is essentially almost
everything that you do so everything
about you know the way we the way we
shift on the seat as our you know as our
blood needs it and we uh and and talking
and so on this is all generated
unconsciously
but when you enter into a complete novel
situation where you really don't know
what you're doing that's when the
conscious mind has to sort of be a part
of what's going on
and and that's when you form new
connections and make new pathways so
that it turns out is i mean this is a
very general statement but that is the
most important thing for people as they
get older is to seek
new experiences and that's the thing
that often doesn't happen especially
when somebody has retired
now dopamine is a
very misunderstood molecule it's often
talked about only in the context of
reward like i'm going to work to this
goal i'm going to build my company i'm
going to you know get 10 years or press
whatever it is and you reach it and you
get this dopamine reward and indeed
that's true but what's often not
discussed is that dopamine
is secreted enroute to rewards while you
pursue rewards
now
the ability to tap into that system
to subjectively amplify that pathway of
reward in pursuit of goals is an
absolute game changer when it comes to
things like
anything challenging that of long
duration or uncertainty or getting
through this cove you know pandemic
situation
the
but the amazing thing is remember the
brain only does five things and we get
to decide which of those sensations and
perceptions have relevance and which
ones don't or which ones are attached to
a goal and which ones aren't so growth
mindset in its purest form is the
attachment of these reward systems to
the effort process to the friction
process and not just to obtaining a
reward and just as a kind of final point
to that there's a very um well-known
body of literature and neuroscience at
least among neuroscientists that talks
about something called reward prediction
error and it says if you can dose the
dopamine
subjectively as you go through the
pursuit of something and then have a lot
of dopamine when you reach that thing
it's very likely that you're going to
reinforce that circuit there will be
neural plasticity and that circuit will
become stronger so the next time you
will revisit those sets of behaviors the
opposite can happen too
where you're in real anticipation of
something this is going to be great this
is going to be great this can be great
and then you reach that goal and it's
kind of underwhelming and that generally
triggers this the circuit that i
referred to earlier this kind of
disappointment or pro-depressive circuit
so dopamine
is involved in reward but it's also
involved in the pursuit of rewards and
so as you reach a milestone or as you
tell yourself i'm on the right track
this friction i'm feeling this late
night this early morning this hard
conversation with somebody that doesn't
feel good i'm going to tell myself this
is for a larger purpose that's that
subjective insertion that abstraction
that we're talking about earlier and
when you start releasing dopamine to
those kinds of things there's
essentially no limit on the number of
things you can do or the energy to do
them so just as a last last point about
dopamine when we're in effort we're
always secreting adrenaline we're always
in pursuit and it's draining it's tiring
dopamine has this beautiful capacity to
buffer adrenaline and you know this
you've experienced this before because
if you've ever been working really
really hard maybe your team is depleted
everything's just a mess and somebody
cracks a joke and all of a sudden in an
instant it's like everything's reframed
that couldn't have been hormonal
hormones work on that on the schedule of
like hours to days to weeks it had to be
neurochemical it absolutely had to be
neurochemical and that neural chemical
is dopamine now what about the the study
you did where you've got the cyclist on
the bike they're going hard hard hard
and you watch for certain brain states
where you know okay they're going to
quit
and then you use that information over
time to get them to delay quitting
farther and farther so behind that lies
the idea that the brain is kind of like
a muscle
and specifically there's a part of the
brain that we really care about it's the
part that's doing self-control so if you
think about it in simple
way to look at is that you start running
you go running
the first mile your legs say let's run
and the brain that controls them says
let's find and another part within says
no problem at all after one mile your
legs say it's a little bit painful but
the parts of the other brain that
control them say keep going after 10
miles the legs say i want to quit and
the other part say no
keep going and there's like a battle
there and at some point you're gonna
break now when you're gonna break
depends on a lot of things your muscles
but it also depends on this kind of
control coming from the front of your
brain that overrides your experience
your pain and if we can see this moment
where you break the moment where you
stop despite the fact that you can do a
little more we can come back to you
tomorrow and say let's do the same thing
you did yesterday have you run only this
time when you get to the moment when we
see that you're about to break we're
going to play a sound we're going to
tell you that we can see that you're
about to break and we ask you to just
continue for one more minute at this
moment that is beyond what you did
yesterday what in that moment how do you
appeal to them is it like come on
like you got this basically
it's right this there's a question in in
sports for a while why is it that people
do better when they play home game
versus outside game like what is it
about your mom being in the audience
that makes you win the game like we in
theory it shouldn't matter like throwing
the basketball should be the same but
somehow we know that if your friends out
there if you're
feeling better we know that people do
better when they're already kind of
winning there's a lot of things that
affect our brain and what we try to
understand right now is where is it in
the brain what is this part of the brain
that gets better when you're
like when your emotions are highlighted
more heightened
incidentally or not so incidentally i
should say when you look at communities
of very high performers and i'm
fortunate enough to do some consulting
with some people from special forces
communities and so forth they're very
good as are you
at attaching a reward to specific
behaviors in subjective ways so growth
mindset
and these dopamine rewards that we
subjectively apply are not about
saying oh you know i had a terrible day
i performed poorly but you know what
it's great i just feel great anyway it's
not about that it's not about attaching
your sense of reward to the ultimate
goal
it's about attaching your sense of
reward to the fact that you're making
action steps that are generally in the
right direction the more you can reward
the effort process
the better off you are at building these
kinds of neural circuits and these kind
of tendencies to be able to lean into
anything challenging over essentially
any duration so how does this work like
how would somebody do this right well
keeping in mind that adrenaline and
epinephrine are all great for getting us
into action this is mother nature's way
of chemically making us feel kind of
agitated remember stress was designed to
agitate us to move us away from things
and toward things but realizing that
that's a
limited resource that eventually that
same chemical is what makes you
have a negative mindset it feels painful
it's the burn in your body it's
uncomfortable
and realizing that dopamine can push
back on that neurochemically it can
suppress those sensations of wanting to
quit you say well then how do i get this
dopamine to work for me before i hit a
goal because not every day is going to
be a real win there's some days i mean i
know from my science career there were
days that were really hard experiments
didn't work papers got rejected and yet
you know i've spent two decades or more
just drilling on and drilling on and
it's been a sheer pleasure at times but
there's been you know some pain points
along the way so what is this process
really about and how would somebody
implement these dopamine and epinephrine
type nor chemical events in their own
life well we all know the example of
like okay you're gonna run a marathon
and i've never run a marathon but um
that'd be a nice goal to have let's say
tomorrow morning i set my shoes near the
door now a lot of people have talked
about this day one you set your shoes
near the door day two you go out the
door day three you run around the block
day four but the key thing is not just
to go through the actions but when you
hit each one of those self-designated
milestones the milestones that you're
setting out for yourself you have to
pause for a moment
and
tell yourself i'm heading in the right
direction i haven't run the marathon yet
but this is the foundation upon which
i'm going to lay another foundation upon
which i'm going to lay another
foundation and those little pulses of
dopamine allow you to get that action
step without the depletion that it would
normally bring otherwise you're just
like you're spending money this is like
replenishing this bank account that you
have and it's a neural bank account and
so dopamine is the is the thing that you
can control the dosing of and so if you
say
today it's my shoes at the door but
tomorrow it's around the block and
that's it but that's in the direction i
want to go
what you do is you now get those two
events plus the next day the mile long
runners and so forth without it
depleting you it actually builds this
capacity to build more reward and this
is what you've done this is what people
from elite special forces can do they
know how to make small
simple physical steps in the real world
that allow them to build on these reward
circuitries but they don't get
delusional about how they're doing they
they know they keep the end in mind but
they get very micro they move the
horizon in very close and so if you can
move the horizon to something you know
you can complete and you reward that
you essentially are where you were
before
you're just as strong if not stronger
but you're heading in the direction you
need to go you're not depleting you're
not spending out anything and it feels a
little weird because none of us like to
reward things that aren't external but
the ability to control these internal
reward schedules is everything uh so the
question is repetition and i agree it's
not thinking about the mountaintop you
can
by the way you breathe
you can change the electricity in your
mind we've seen that with the people we
put grids on like we have actual
measurements now but that's the
you know what's the structure where you
get the most out of repetition what is
the
perfect spot
where uh meditative breathing hits that
sweet spot for people and they'll
increase it if it continues to benefit
them but the food
the breathing sleep is a hard one but to
me
food
what we eat
and
meditative breathing i think are the
most
uh graspable
and measurable uh the creativity stuff
the sleep stuff
the exercise stuff is harder for people
uh but the exercise stuff is in its own
way the most important if we can get
back to that ooh why keeps your brain
arteries open releases all these
neurotrophic factors inside your brain
so not just the plumbing that irrigates
the flesh of the brain tell me about
ignf yeah they're nerve growth factors
they're all neurotrophic factors and
whatever the
the for the in this case to be
abbreviation gdnf bdnf ngf it doesn't
matter they end with gf
and growth factors so it really is i've
heard your word miracle grow but getting
back to the garden analogy
uh to keep the flesh
we're gonna get you know electricity is
one thing
to keep the flesh healthy
uh you have to irrigate it
and that has to do with your brain
arteries
and
since we already said it's not a it's
not a ball
you know it's these uh you know these
jellyfish and they're moving and they're
throbbing and they're pulsating and
their tentacles are reaching out there's
a lot of space in between
and that extracellular space outside of
the actual cells outside the neurons
outside of the jellyfish if you will
it's not just water
there's chemicals floating around in
there now dopamine might be just from
technical to tentacles you know
serotonin might be this way but what's
it what's in all the stuff around all
those billions and billions of neurons
they're growth factors
and minerals
and chemicals that the brain naturally
has but there's also a soup that these
billions and billions of neurons are
floating in bdnf is a key component of
that soup that helps regulate the health
of each of those uh jellyfish or nerds
and we can trigger more of that exercise
yeah you exercise it releases it it
showers itself it's not like the thighs
thigh muscle sends it up to the brain
the brain says hey i'm feeling good this
is good i like this
i'm gonna create a new rut i'm gonna
remind you you feel good when you run
the brain will shower itself with growth
factors there are growth factors
rain says hey you know the
electrochemical balance is better with
those so i think that's where you get
the runners high and it's not just
adrenaline it's not
dope it means a happy chemical i'm
jacked up i'm on adrenaline it's just
such a complex ecosystem
and rather than feeling uh
intimidated by that to me i just see
opportunities
on how people can you know improve their
lives
so motivation is a word right it's a
it's a label that we put a set of
events in our brain
uh what you actually want is the outcome
of that you want to do things that when
you when it's hard
so i think that there are a few kind of
things that we know work one is uh
evidence of past successes if i
typically when i go back to your
memories and i reflame them as successes
suddenly they suddenly the current event
that's the same is a success so i think
that one one thing is like having
success stories and identification
stories as in you find there's a lot of
people out there there was a person that
is like you that had similar experience
and chose the thing that you want to
choose
find this person or these people and
it's going to rub into you so i i get
asked by my students often how do i
become funnier how do i become a smarter
and like my one tip that i give them all
the time
is
surround yourself with people that you
want to be like you want to be funny
just sit next to comedians just go to
the same room they are and just sit next
to them it's going to rub on you by
osmosis because it's just it's the
environment that is around us that
really changes everything and and other
people said that before but i'll tell
you the neuroscience behind it
we know now that
brains interact
with each other through language in a
way that synchronizes the brains so when
i talk to you right now
if you're engaged with what i say it
means that if we scan our brain right
now our brains are gonna look alike more
than yours and someone on the street
that isn't here so two people in the
same room
as soon as they kind of interact their
brains literally start kind of if you
want pulsing in the same way parts of
the brain line up in the same way part
shut down so we actually are a fact this
is how we affect each other this is how
communication made humans who they are
this is the one thing that makes us
better than all the other animals
because we are able to communicate using
language affect each other brain and
create
narratives that don't exist together we
both believe in things that we've never
seen before like god or or ideas that's
like democracy or money like those
things we invented and we can
communicate them and create this image
in people's brains and they all share
this thing
so in the same way if you surround
yourself by people that you want to be
like you hear them communicate they
change your brain and it's going to rub
on to you you will actually become
funnier if you sit and listen to funny
people next to you you actually become
more motivated if you're next to people
that are motivated
the next version of that if you cannot
find them if you're sitting right now in
a rural part of alaska and you can't
just find yourself in los angeles with
the people you want to be with is to
actually just look at them on videos and
books and that's the way our brain
basically gets content and change so
changing brains happens in many many
ways but the easiest one that everyone
can try is to say what kind of world i
want to be in
and bring this world to you in the form
of movies stories
tv shows or people that's the ways to
kind of get
things that you want
next to you
so this is not to lose weight it's what
nutrients to put inside you where if you
have a thousand people here you have a
thousand people here and for 20 years
they eat differently
what are the numbers of people with
dementia all of the things being equal
it essentially says
uh it doesn't have to be mediterranean
it just has to be
plants like as i tell my kids plants
which is
you know fruit or salad doesn't have to
be just salad you know yogurt nuts
lean meats like you know chicken and
salmon what is it that salmon has
omega-3s it's the only thing in our
literature that we know is an is
a nutritional component in food
that is good for brain health and the
omega-3s are unique type of fat
that are
you know the brain is an extremely fatty
organ and so it needs to it needs to
have those fats omega-3s
are the only things nutritionally that i
would say is you could supplement or
actually add salmon in a couple times a
week so that's the mind diet twist on
the heart diet by adding a little bit
more emphasis on salmon
what you can't have is a lot of fried
processed food and if you have
a cheat day or whatever you have a
burger it doesn't negate what you've
done i think that's the hardest thing
about dieting for people they feel like
the shift has to be complete and
religious and to me it's more glacial
because the benefits will also take
decades to accrue you know that's my
that's my person you know
those are the nutrients that are best
for the brain
so you know opt for foods that are
nutrient dense um
one of the easiest things that i
recommend that people
can do every single day is to consume
what i call a large fatty salad
um
i think it's one of the best ways to
really check off so many of your
nutritional boxes to get an abundance of
uh dietary fiber that the microbes that
live in your large intestine love to
consume
um and when i say fatty i don't mean you
know
throwing on tortilla strips and cheese
and ranch dressing i mean
you know taking a bowl of dark leafy
greens
kale spinach which are you know top
sources of magnesium which 50 of people
do not consume adequate amounts of
folate
arugula arugula is a top source of
nitrates dietary nitrate really
important in terms of increasing blood
flow to the brain one single high
nitrate meal might actually improve
cognitive function it's that powerful
um dousing those dark leafy greens with
extra virgin olive oil which research
has shown out of barcelona spain the
pretty med study you can consume about a
liter a week
to better cognitive function cognitive
health cardiovascular health and it
might even help you lose weight because
it's so anti-inflammatory actually
there's a compound in extra virgin olive
oil that is as anti-inflammatory as
low-dose advil but without any of the
potential for negative side effects
and importantly
you need to have fat in that salad
because fat allows many of the most
important nutrients in the salad to
become bioavailable so i talk a lot
about in this book which i think is
bringing you know especially um you know
there's a lot i think actually that
there's a lot uh of new information that
i bring to the conversation but i talk
particularly about
carotenoids and how research has shown
out of university of georgia that by
eating
lutein and zeaxanthin by by
supplementing with these carotenoids you
can actually boost visual processing
speed by 20 percent even if you're young
and healthy so i mean these are young
and healthy people that are already
considered to be at the peak of their
cognitive prowess visual processing
speed is so important i mean think about
in terms of responding to visual stimuli
you know driving athletic performance
sports performance things like video
games video games yeah yeah
absolutely so
dark leafy greens are abundant in these
two carotenoids and they're only
absorbed through the digestive tract
when in the presence of fat you don't
absorb any of them unless you're
consuming them with fat so like that
fat-free dressing throw that in the
trash
extra virgin olive oil you know is super
key eating a large fatty salad
i think is just really key people tend
to think about salads in terms of like
weight loss i want to lose weight i'm
going to eat more salad but really in
terms of the brain
it's powerful you also get the benefit
of i mentioned dietary fiber we now know
that you have microbes that live in your
large intestine that when you consume a
fermentable soluble prebiotic fiber
which is found in abundance in that in
that bowl of greens
the microbes churn out a compound called
butyrate which is profoundly
anti-inflammatory it is really you know
beneficial in terms of the gut ecosystem
it's been shown to boost levels of
growth factors in the brain
which promote neuroplasticity which is
your brain's ability to change over time
very important stuff it's about
intermittent fasting in the book what do
you think about that what is its impact
on the mind longevity
um what's this place so if you want to
kick the mind diet into next year
and you're thinking i don't want to just
stave off
brain degeneration right like what if
you wanted to work on focus and
cognition these things are harder to
test but when you go into the big
neuroscience journals they speak about
intermittent fasting and the best way i
can explain it is your brain's a hybrid
vehicle
it grew it evolved through through
thousands and thousands and thousands of
years of lots of food scarcity
you didn't eat all the time
and so it's got a backup mechanism
called ketones so after 16 hours
if you don't put glucose in
and the liver is done
releasing the glucose it's held on to
through glycogen reserves then it'll
start burning fat
it'll clip off those oxygens and
hydrogens and they'll make ketones out
of it
intermittent fasting can also help you
lose weight i think that's why most
people are interested in but it's the
way the brain prefers to get its fuel
source and it's based on a diet
lessons about dieting learn through
controlling
epilepsy and seizures in kids in areas
where there's no medicine
so i was in ukraine
and
when they don't have medicine or a type
of seizures these are the abnormal
electrical activity of the brain just
like an arrhythmia would be an abnormal
electrical activity of the heart
uh they would just feed them all fat
diet you could smell it in the hospitals
so something about an all-fat diet
forcing you into just using ketones
now intermittent fasting is back and
forth glucose and then ketones glucose
and then ketones but for kids if you
just get them almost nearly all ketone
as the source that goes up to the brain
through an all-fat diet
their
seizure rates
go down you know so that's proof
that food
changes mind
because the mind is the electricity
sparking through that flesh food
will change the electricity detectable
measurable electricity in your brain
food affects mind food affects brain
with that premise
we can talk about okay mind diet will
hold off
dementia and intermittent fasting
might make you feel like you've had a
cup of coffee once you get a rhythm out
it's not going to make you smarter but
it'll bring you to your most focused to
bring you to your most attentive it's
not oh i'm intermittent fasting and now
i can do physics it's it's it's not like
that it's
your personal best and then the habits
you demonstrate to your family by trying
to be at your personal best and then
your kids see that and your friends see
that and i think that's how you impact
generation change is to have
uh capable people demonstrate hey it's
not hard
and this is the best we can do for
ourselves
so i think that
in a way there's an application to free
will right we live life thinking we make
decisions all the time and uh
responsible for our decisions and also
kind of determined and defined by those
so if i ask you what you wanna have for
lunch and i offer you five different
things and you make a choice then your
choice is somehow your identity this is
like what you what you
care about
and if i told you right now that i could
predict what you're going to choose an
hour before you made a choice a day
20 years before it kind of takes away
some of our identity in a way
but also
kind of gives us meaning because it says
okay there's actually a narrative that
we carry with us throughout life and now
now the choice has become really
something that defines who we are not
just the moment of but as a person in
the world so i always care about like
free will understanding it predicting it
and also using it to change things so if
you if you think that okay all my
choices are kind of determined do i have
any meaning to my life the answer is
they're not determined we do have
control over them and that's what makes
us kind of human
so you believe that we do have free will
or you believe that it's totally
different than how we're thinking of and
we have to totally reimagine it so
there's like two kind of moments that
need to be addressed one is
whether we do actually have this moment
of spark that happens when the choice is
totally arbitrary and we have like a
choice i do believe that we have that
free will kind of a toss of a coin where
something gets determined but what's
interesting is the moment we become
aware of the freewheel choice as in
i ask you you're sitting restaurant and
i ask you do you want the fish or the
steak there's this moment like you have
two options and now you're about to make
a choice what do you want take steak for
sure you had a second now where you had
kind of to look at all the options i
gave you only two and make a decision so
now
at some point if i ask you when did you
make the choice you would say well maybe
as soon as i finished the sentence maybe
i would maybe you would say a
fraction of a second afterwards the
question is a how far before did we know
the answer to that also did was there
anything i could have said differently
that would make you save the fish
and most importantly what's the gap
between the moment he would tell me that
the moment i chose and the moment that
you actually chose and apparently there
is a gap and this gap is what we call
the illusion of free will the moment
where you say
that's the moment see this is t0 this is
when it happened and i can look at your
brain and say you know what
actually here you already knew that
you're going to choose or even like even
if you want to take it one first level
we can actually stimulate your brain and
make you choose this thing and i will
tell you and say who made it trust me
say i definitely make the choice myself
this was my decision and i said well you
know what here's me zapping your brain
before it's making you say fish in one
of the episodes of the brain on pbs
such a cool one i know this one really
got my wife's attention where you show
the puppets playing
and one puppet's like trying to open the
box and the other pup's like trying to
help it and then there's a third puppet
and he comes and like crushes the box
down and like is mean to the other
puppet then you give kids babies young
babies
the opportunity to play with either the
nice puppet or the mean puppet and they
choose
they choose the nice puppet this was an
experiment done by paul bloom at yale
and i recreated this experiment for the
show and
yeah what this demonstrates is that we
come to the table with a lot of
intuitions and instincts about things
including because we're extremely social
animals we
uh are very good at judging right away
whether for example this person is
helpful or that person is mean and and
we associate ourselves with the helpful
people um instead of the bullies you
know there's there was this
debate for many decades about nature
versus nurture but the answer that
question is dead because it's not either
of those it's it's both of those
together yeah the only demo that i saw
was one person basically having a little
box and they have buttons and have to
choose whether you want to press the
left or the right
and people sit there and they press left
right right left left left for like 10
minutes and then someone asked them was
it your choice which button to press at
any point to say of course and then you
zoom out and you see a person sitting
with a tms like this machine that looks
at their brain they're basically playing
like a puppeteer left right
out of here that's real that's real
and what's interesting isn't that you
can do that this is not surprising we
know that we can actually zap your brain
and make you move your head what's
surprising is that you would tell me it
was my choice like you would you would
believe that it was your decision you
wouldn't question the fact that what you
did was your decision and this to me is
the interesting part that we we kind of
have this
way with our brain to always defend it
and always say whatever i did i wanted
to do if i made this thing it wasn't my
choice and now we know that it wasn't
necessarily your choice that things
affected you the things made you do what
you did and you will always claim that
it was your decision so we can actually
show you that you're not really free
people respond when you show them funny
they mostly try to defend free will so
they try to argue with me and you know i
show them the video of me changing
things and they say no no we have this
experiment where we bring them to the
lab and we just tell them things we say
okay what do you want to eat after the
experiment whether you want to sit here
or there we ask them to make decisions
and we don't want to tell them anything
just say take decisions like sit here
there do you want this pen or that pen
do you want the light on or off and then
we ask them after the experiment how
many choices you made the people who
experienced us toying with their free
will think that they made hundreds of
choices they made about 14 but they
really feel that okay i had too many
choices i controlled everything this was
my decision they kind of tried to grasp
into the idea of free will and say i had
a lot of choices in my life and i made
them they become a little more religious
they become a little bit more
ethical a lot of things happen to you
when you feel that what's in question is
your identity one of the stories that
was my favorite was there's heaven and
there's hell and they in heaven they use
the same information to reward and
excite that hell uses to punish and
condemn which is the knowledge that free
will is non-existent
walk people through like how how was
that great for some people and so
heartbreaking for others
um well it's just a matter of whether
you believe in whether you
feel like
it's it's too strange
to to imagine that we are these giant
vast creatures i mean think of the fact
that you're made up of 30 trillion
trillion cells
and you're this huge giant creature
that's driven around by this three pound
mission control center that's sort of
controlling all this and through these
cables that come out you know moves it
all around and so on it's very
weird to think about maybe that's it
about what's going on just like just
like you said you were freaked out when
i mentioned the thing about vision
before um
it's really freaky to think about not
having any free will and that
fundamentally were these very complex
robots for me free will
um
because i feel like i'm in control it
doesn't seem to matter
right so
where it might get weird is if you
actually could break down like exactly
what algorithm is firing that but then
even so let's pretend you can identify
the algorithm here's the other algorithm
that makes you feel that way or do this
thing and then here's the algorithm that
makes you tom not care that would get a
little weird but then
it's so like recursive back to well
there's you know something that's
feeding into how i feel about that exact
moment so since i feel like i'm in
control
it doesn't really change yeah and this
by the way is related to that same story
from some where it's this issue of
if i were to get out a whiteboard we
can't do this yet neuroscience but
imagine that i were to say like here's
exactly
why strawberry ice cream tastes the way
it does to you and why it's so delicious
to you and blah blah i could explain
that and show the pathways and the jeans
and it wouldn't affect your enjoyment of
it at all it wouldn't change anything
about your
experience of it and so there's this
funny disconnect between what we're able
to do in science
and what it is like to be a human and
and there's this gap there in in the
explanatory framework
so help me understand how
you
know that you can manipulate the brain
and yet you still believe in free will
but it sounds like you believe in free
will in the way that it's tied to your
own self-narrative
so
here's the idea i feel that uh there's a
lot of things that affect our decisions
the temperature in the room the height
of the chill the
weight of the book we're holding a lot
of things and this is studied by a lot
of people in many many ways that show
time and again that you can actually
change a person's behavior and we can
list those things so someone can take
them and now have a kind of you know
list of things that they can apply if
they want to have better interactions
with people what temperature should they
won't be what they should do so we know
that we know that thing and at the same
time we still
live life as if it's our decisions
entirely so we know that i can trick you
by
you know
making the price of the food 699 rather
than seven and you would think that six
not seven that's like the simplest one
in the book and all of us know it and it
still works
taking that to a larger scale we know
that there's hundreds of thousands of
biases that affect our brain
and even if i tell you what they are you
will still work the same way so
freewheel is
becoming interesting to me when we learn
all of those things and we say okay then
who am i kind of what's the
who's in who's in charge who's the
puppeteer in this example and the
reality is that
there what we learn is that there are
more than one puppeteer in our brain
there's many many and every day one
other guy wakes up and so one day with
this guy one day with this guy and
they're kind of vying for dominance they
fight and they compete they
kind of
make a decision together they vote and
ultimately we protect the person who
spoke last and we say this is who i am
and to me what's interesting is that we
can now actually show all the characters
we can show them fighting we can tell
you that there's more people in your
brain and in doing so we can actually
allow you to really manifest different
sides of yours so you know maybe that
you're making better choices in the
morning and i make lectures in the
evening you might know that you're
making better decisions when you're
hungry and i'm when i'm full when you're
talking to your friends when you're
alone so we can now profile your brain
the other element is brain training
it doesn't have to be some
weird
game that's not intuitive i think brain
training just means learning
as a habit
one step past where you're comfortable
if you're reading it you know it your
brain's and it's an idol if it's too
hard it's not even engaged it's i'm like
i'm not going to win this race i'm not
going to kick in in second gear so just
just like video games just good enough
to get to the next level right they
don't hit you with the fifth level the
tilt level up front it's level one to
level two level two to level three
that's what learning is so despite your
knowledge and intellect it's just that
level right beyond you that is brain
training so you don't have to buy an app
you just have to challenge yourself and
think and do you think when you're doing
that that it's um you're getting into a
repetitive brain firing pattern that
ultimately wires
you actually change your brain so so we
didn't mention that the science behind
it much like in terms of what we do but
we put electrons in people's brains and
we look at their brains while things
happen to them and we actually see it
happen in action we see how the brain
changes when people communicate we see
how the brain looks when to when you
watch a movie
we see how your brain aligns with the
movie and when you tell someone else the
story of the movie their brain aligns
with your brain but aligns also with the
brain of the director of the movie so
communication is this mechanism by which
information flows between brains and
changes the brains and actually if you
want to take it one step above this is
also how
we change ourselves because we talk to
ourselves all the time you walk you
drive your car or you walk to work and
you're just alone with yourself and you
communicate you also change your brain
you kind of solidify the things that you
want to be more like and you suppress
the ones you don't want so we always
talk and those voices those are
basically the other characters in our
brain that talk to each other you kind
of choose which ones to give more weight
to so this is how you become the better
person you want to be so we actually now
play with things that change behavior
during the night when you're sleeping in
the following way as somebody who's not
a synesthete are there ways to train my
brain to draw more of these connections
it's a fascinating question and we
haven't quite got that yet but
we're getting there i think with
synesthesia so there's this gene that
causes excess connections
because there are what are called
transcription factors which allow the
gene to be expressed selectively in one
region if it's expressed selectively in
the fusiform gyrus by the number area
and color area they get cross wired and
you get number color synthesis and
that's no big deal
it helps them remember phone numbers
unlike us they see a spectrum of colors
in front of it
not very useful these days with uh cell
phones
but it turns out if the gene is
expressed diffusely which can happen
then you get more cross wiring
throughout the brain
now that i claim is the basis of
creativity and metaphor but when the
bard shakespeare said it is the east and
juliet is the sun
you don't go juliet is the sun does that
mean she was a
radiant fireball
actually
that's not a bad metaphor
he meant she was radiant she was
nurturing she was warm
she rises in bed like the sun rises in
the east and you can make any number of
connections you want she's the center of
my solar system like the sun is the
center of the solar system right and
shakes me as a master of doing this
i bet
she might have been essentially i'm not
sure but it could have been a synesthete
but since these are more connections
throughout the brain and therefore if
concepts and ideas like sun and juliet
are enshrined in different neural
architecture in different parts of the
brain even far-flung regions of the
brain
ideas and concepts
the excess connections across the brain
creates a greater propensity to link
seemingly unrelated ideas and concepts
and that's the basis of metaphor and
creativity so now you can get to the
molecular basis you can clone the gene
look at the brain connections molecular
basis neural basis of esoteric abilities
like creativity for the first time in in
in history of neuroscience and brain
research this is now how you can tap
into it now that's a big question
no no please jump in but i was going to
say
there we are still
we just scratched the surface we don't
know quite how to harness it disability
sort of genetic engineering or something
but i would say in schools and in fact
in your own life poetry has a tremendous
role i think we should all
try to become poets wow that's
interesting yeah because poetry and
laughter and humor because humor
involves unusual juxtapositions of ideas
so there's a lot in common with
creativity and not surprisingly many
very creative people
have a great sense of humor
i mean the only exception would be
germans who
any germans in the house were
exceptionally creative as you know
so
telling this sounds frivolous but
you know having courses on humor and
laughter so the conclusion is
anything difficult where you have to
think
is good for your brain
if you ask usain bolt how do i get
stronger legs run it's intuitive
but the flesh in our skulls it's meant
to think and feel
and that is the power of self-growth and
it's a thinking machine it's a thinking
flesh that you actually have to
use or to protect itself because it's an
energy hog right it's three pounds but
uses 20
if you're not using parts of it it'll
program itself to let those parts of the
garden wither so the diversity of
thinking and the depth of thinking just
one level past what you're used to is
the way to keep the whole garden
flourishing and it is a garden in there
there's chemicals there are things
moving there are different types of
brain cells it's not just neurons so i
would try to give that metaphor analogy
if you will that it's a garden and you
have to irrigate it and stimulate and
tend to all the corners particularly the
ones you're starting to neglect maybe
it's your left hand
getting out of the box and engaging the
recesses of your mind is the most
important thing and then you have the
then then the creative things happen
you don't just sit down and have them
happen you got to work and dream and go
hard and on top of that something
creative can happen everybody thank you
so much for watching if you haven't
already be sure to smash that subscribe
button and hit the bell notification so
you never miss a thing until next time
my friends be legendary take care